The purpose of this video is to clarify the statement that I made in the previous video.
So in the previous video, I demonstrated that the output of a hook into a transformer block is the
same as the output of the hidden states.
And so that is true, but there's a little bit of a qualification for the final transformer block,
the very last layer.
And so basically in this video I'm going to demonstrate what that is and why it is the case.
So here's the story.
When you implant a hook into a transformer block which is called layer H in these, uh, open AI models
on hugging face, when you implant a hook to grab the output of each layer H each transformer block,
that is just all of this processing.
And that is exactly the same as the output of the hidden states variable when you output the hidden
states from a forward pass.
So those are all the same for every layer, every transformer block except the very last transformer
block.
So when, uh, when the model goes through the very last transformer block, then the output that you
get in the hidden states is not only equal to the output of this block, which is the input from the
previous transformer block.
And then with the attention modulation added on the MLP modulation added on, it is also this layer
here L underscore f which is the final layer norm.
That's what this stands for.
And so in the rest of this code demo I'm going to demonstrate this to you.
Okay.
So here I create a hook function and implant it.
Very simple hook function.
Here I have a dictionary.
And there is one item in the dictionary.
Its key is data and it just contains the number four.
Fine.
Okay.
So then here inside this hook the hook just does nothing except for poor.
Replace this number four with the output from this layer that I've implanted into, and I'm implanting
it into model transformer so hidden.
And then n layers this variable n layers minus one.
And then I'm implanting that hook okay n layers minus one.
So n layers is just a convenience variable I created here.
The GPT two small has 12 hidden layers 12 transformer blocks.
So this is 12.
And of course because of the zero based indexing the index of the transformer block is 11.
That's why I subtract one okay.
So I'll run this code.
Uh here I run a forward pass with just the word hello.
So we don't really need to do a lot of processing here.
We just need something to push through the data.
And I'm requesting, uh, to output the hidden states here.
I am just checking the sizes of these.
So it's, uh, one sequence in the batch.
One token, 768 68 embeddings.
Vectors.
This is for the hooked data.
So block output it was initialized as four and then it gets replaced with the output of the transformer
block.
The final transformer block.
And then I have the final hidden states and that's the same size.
Okay.
Now here's the thing.
For every layer except for the final transformer block, these two variables are the same.
They are equal to each other, but for the final transformer block they are not equal to each other.
And that is what I'm going to demonstrate here.
So first I will demonstrate that these are not equal to each other.
So this is yeah.
These are the data that I got from the hook.
And just looking at the first uh sequence in the batch, the final token, this is also just zero.
All of the embeddings vectors minus the final hidden state.
And the same token okay, it doesn't matter what these numbers are basically just random numbers as
far as we are concerned.
But the important thing is that they are not zeros, they are not the same thing.
Okay, so let me close that for a moment.
And now what I'm doing is taking exactly these same data.
And then I'm pushing it through model transformer underscore f.
Of course this is the final layer norm.
This is the layer norm that comes after all of the transformer blocks and immediately before the embeddings
layer.
Okay.
And then this line of code is identical to this line of code just with a different variable name.
And here they're all zeros.
Okay.
So what does this demonstrate to us?
This demonstrates that the last hidden states is actually the output of the final transformer block
pushed through the layer norm.
And that is important to keep in mind because you will see in many videos in the rest of this course,
that when we analyze dynamics as a function of layer, the very last layer often, not always, but
often looks qualitatively different.
The patterns of the calculations in the final hidden States layer will look different from all the previous
layers.
And part of that is because the model has learned that that's its last chance to do any calculations.
So there really is something special about the final transformer block.
But also part of that is just because of this additional layer normalization, which is not present.
It's not applied to the previous blocks.
Okay.
And so now to demonstrate that to you, I'm going to let me see Re-implant this hook.
And I will uh, normally, you know, the way you probably should do this is have a handle here.
Uh, and then I can remove that handle later.
I can say handle dot remove.
But since I didn't actually do that, then that handle is this hook is kind of permanently stuck inside
the model.
So I'm actually just going to reimport the model from scratch.
So then I'm going to have exactly the same thing.
But now this is n minus two instead of minus one.
So now I'm implanting this hook into the penultimate layer and not the final layer.
Forward pass is the same.
This is the same.
Okay.
So now I'm going to show you, uh, well, I can show you this.
These still different, but now I can say minus two and minus two.
Uh, sorry.
Wait.
This should still be minus one, because that's the token.
So now this is showing that when we compare the output from this hook that we grabbed inside the hook
to the hidden states for any layer other than the very last one, now we get a bunch of zeros.
And furthermore, you will not be surprised to see this result here.
I'm just going to write, uh, minus two over here.
And this is actually, uh.
Oops, sorry.
Wait.
This should be minus two over here.
My apologies.
Okay.
So again, it doesn't matter what these numbers are.
The important thing is they are no longer zeros.
And why are they no longer zeros?
Because now we are transforming what should be equal to this.
But we're transforming it through the final layer normalization.
This is not something that the model does.
I'm just demonstrating this to you here.
Just so you see that these really are different.
Okay.
So I hope that makes sense.
Again the conclusion is that let me go back to this hook.
The conclusion of this video is that when you hook into a transformer layer, the output variable here
is the final output of the of that transformer block.
However, when you hook it into the very, very last transformer block, no matter how many blocks there
are, whatever is the very last one it is not only the hidden states is not only this output block,
the hidden states that you get from this output, hidden states, and then output hidden states.
That is the output of the final transformer block.
Push through the final layer norm.